ports/qemu/README.md, before:

MicroPython port to qemu
========================

This is experimental, community-supported port for Cortex-M and RISC-V RV32IMC
emulation as provided by QEMU (http://qemu.org).

The purposes of this port are to enable:

1. Continuous integration
    - run tests against architecture-specific parts of code base
2. Experimentation
    - simulation & prototyping of anything that has architecture-specific
      code
    - exploring instruction set in terms of optimising some part of
      MicroPython or a module
3. Streamlined debugging
    - no need for JTAG or even an MCU chip itself
    - no need to use OpenOCD or anything else that might slow down the
      process in terms of plugging things together, pressing buttons, etc.

Dependencies
------------

### ARM

For ARM-based boards the build requires a bare-metal ARM toolchain, such as
`arm-none-eabi-gcc`.

### RISC-V

For RISC-V-based boards the build requires a bare metal RISC-V toolchain with GCC 10
or later, either with multilib support or 32 bits specific (M, C, and Zicsr
extensions must be supported, along with ilp32 ABI).  Both newlib and picolibc are
supported, with the latter having precedence if found.

Most pre-built toolchains should work out of the box, either coming from your
Linux distribution's package manager, or independently packaged ones like
[xPack](https://xpack.github.io/dev-tools/riscv-none-elf-gcc/).

Build instructions
------------------

First make sure the MicroPython cross-compiler is built (run from this directory):

    $ make -C ../../mpy-cross

Then build using:

    $ make

The default qemu-supported board is `mps2-an385`, a Cortex-M3 board.  To select a
different board pass the `BOARD` argument to `make`, for example:

    $ make BOARD=SABRELITE

Available boards are:

| Name for `BOARD=` | Architecture | Corresponding qemu board |
| ----------------- | ------------ | ------------------------ |
| `MICROBIT`        | `arm`        | `microbit`               |
| `MPS2_AN385`      | `arm`        | `mps2-an385`             |
| `NETDUINO2`       | `arm`        | `netduino2`              |
| `SABRELITE`       | `arm`        | `sabrelite`              |
| `VIRT_RV32`       | `riscv32`    | `virt`                   |

Running
-------

When the firmware is run it will provide a REPL on the emulated hardware UART.
To access the REPL directly use:

    $ make repl

This will start `qemu-system-arm` with the UART redirected to stdio.  It's also
possible to redirect the UART to a pty device using:

    $ make run

This will start the emulation and the name of the pty device will be printed to
stdout.  This serial device then be accessed via a serial terminal program,
for example `mpremote`:

    $ mpremote connect /dev/pts/1

You can disconnect and reconnect to the serial device multiple times.  Once you
are finished, stop the `make run` command by pressing Ctrl-C where that command
was started (or execute `machine.reset()` at the REPL).

The test suite can be run against the firmware by using the UART redirection.
You can either do this automatically using the single command:

    $ make test

Or manually by first starting the emulation with `make run` and then running the
tests against the serial device, for example:

    $ cd ../../tests
    $ ./run-tests.py --target qemu --device /dev/pts/1

Extra make options
------------------

The following options can be specified on the `make` command line:
- `CFLAGS_EXTRA`: pass in extra flags for the compiler.
- `RUN_TESTS_EXTRA`: pass in extra flags for `run-tests.py` when invoked via
  `make test`.
- `QEMU_DEBUG=1`: when running qemu (via `repl`, `run` or `test` target), qemu
  will block until a debugger is connected.  By default it waits for a gdb connection
  on TCP port 1234.
- `QEMU_DEBUG_ARGS`: defaults to `-s` (gdb on TCP port 1234), but can be overridden
  with different qemu gdb arguments.
- `QEMU_DEBUG_EXTRA`: extra options to pass to qemu when `QEMU_DEBUG=1` is used.

Commit message:

qemu/riscv64: Add new QEMU RV64 port.
This adds a QEMU-based bare metal RISC-V 64 bits port.  For the time being
only QEMU's "virt" 64 bits board is supported, using the lp64 ABI and the
RV64IMC architecture.

The port's README is also updated to keep track of these changes.

Signed-off-by: Alessandro Gatti <a.gatti@frob.it>

ports/qemu/README.md, after:

MicroPython port to qemu
========================

This is experimental, community-supported port for Cortex-M and RISC-V RV32IMC
emulation as provided by QEMU (http://qemu.org).

The purposes of this port are to enable:

1. Continuous integration
    - run tests against architecture-specific parts of code base
2. Experimentation
    - simulation & prototyping of anything that has architecture-specific
      code
    - exploring instruction set in terms of optimising some part of
      MicroPython or a module
3. Streamlined debugging
    - no need for JTAG or even an MCU chip itself
    - no need to use OpenOCD or anything else that might slow down the
      process in terms of plugging things together, pressing buttons, etc.

Dependencies
------------

### ARM

For ARM-based boards the build requires a bare-metal ARM toolchain, such as
`arm-none-eabi-gcc`.

### RISC-V 32

For RV32-based boards the build requires a bare metal RISC-V toolchain with GCC 10
or later, either with multilib support or 32 bits specific (M, C, and Zicsr
extensions must be supported, along with ilp32 ABI).  Both newlib and picolibc are
supported, with the latter having precedence if found.

Most pre-built toolchains should work out of the box, either coming from your
Linux distribution's package manager, or independently packaged ones like
[xPack](https://xpack.github.io/dev-tools/riscv-none-elf-gcc/).

### RISC-V 64

For RV64-based boards the build requires a bare metal RISC-V toolchain with GCC 10
or later, either with multilib support or 64 bits specific (M, C, and Zicsr
extensions must be supported, along with lp64 ABI).  Both newlib and picolibc are
supported, with the latter having precedence if found.

Most pre-built toolchains should work out of the box, either coming from your
Linux distribution's package manager, or independently packaged ones like
[xPack](https://xpack.github.io/dev-tools/riscv-none-elf-gcc/).

Build instructions
------------------

First make sure the MicroPython cross-compiler is built (run from this directory):

    $ make -C ../../mpy-cross

Then build using:

    $ make

The default qemu-supported board is `mps2-an385`, a Cortex-M3 board.  To select a
different board pass the `BOARD` argument to `make`, for example:

    $ make BOARD=SABRELITE

Available boards are:

| Name for `BOARD=` | Architecture | Corresponding qemu board |
| ----------------- | ------------ | ------------------------ |
| `MICROBIT`        | `arm`        | `microbit`               |
| `MPS2_AN385`      | `arm`        | `mps2-an385`             |
| `NETDUINO2`       | `arm`        | `netduino2`              |
| `SABRELITE`       | `arm`        | `sabrelite`              |
| `VIRT_RV32`       | `riscv32`    | `virt`                   |
| `VIRT_RV64`       | `riscv64`    | `virt`                   |

Running
-------

When the firmware is run it will provide a REPL on the emulated hardware UART.
To access the REPL directly use:

    $ make repl

This will start `qemu-system-arm` with the UART redirected to stdio.  It's also
possible to redirect the UART to a pty device using:

    $ make run

This will start the emulation and the name of the pty device will be printed to
stdout.  This serial device then be accessed via a serial terminal program,
for example `mpremote`:

    $ mpremote connect /dev/pts/1

You can disconnect and reconnect to the serial device multiple times.  Once you
are finished, stop the `make run` command by pressing Ctrl-C where that command
was started (or execute `machine.reset()` at the REPL).

The test suite can be run against the firmware by using the UART redirection.
You can either do this automatically using the single command:

    $ make test

Or manually by first starting the emulation with `make run` and then running the
tests against the serial device, for example:

    $ cd ../../tests
    $ ./run-tests.py --target qemu --device /dev/pts/1

Extra make options
------------------

The following options can be specified on the `make` command line:
- `CFLAGS_EXTRA`: pass in extra flags for the compiler.
- `RUN_TESTS_EXTRA`: pass in extra flags for `run-tests.py` when invoked via
  `make test`.
- `QEMU_DEBUG=1`: when running qemu (via `repl`, `run` or `test` target), qemu
  will block until a debugger is connected.  By default it waits for a gdb connection
  on TCP port 1234.
- `QEMU_DEBUG_ARGS`: defaults to `-s` (gdb on TCP port 1234), but can be overridden
  with different qemu gdb arguments.
- `QEMU_DEBUG_EXTRA`: extra options to pass to qemu when `QEMU_DEBUG=1` is used.
